# Master's Thesis Project

## Inference of Climate Tipping Interactions: From Dynamical Systems to Data-Driven Perspectives

**Abstract:** Sustained global warming risks to transgress the critical thresholds of multiple climate tipping elements, possibly driving the Earth system towards qualitatively different conditions. Next to being unprecedented in human history, tipping would have a substantially negative impact on planetary resilience, ecosystems, and human welfare. Despite growing recognition of the destabilizing interplay among tipping elements, details about their interactions remain unsettled. Therefore, this thesis explores whether causal inference methods could be used to reconstruct interactions between tipping elements. To do so, the causal discovery algorithm PCMCI+ is benchmarked on synthetic data generated by a dynamical model of interacting tipping elements (PyCascades). Results indicate that inference of tipping interactions from observational data is in principle possible, although challenging due to stationarity concerns and limited detected power in the presence of overlying feedback loops. As a proof of concept, the algorithm is applied to three paleoclimate proxies reflecting Dansgaard-Oeschger variability, large-scale abrupt transitions that have previously been attributed to frequently studied tipping elements (Greenland and West Antarctic Ice Sheets, Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation). Due to inherent data quality and representational issues, an application to paleoclimate proxies is however severely limited and no interactions beyond the bipolar seesaw, also evident through traditional correlation analysis, are found. Nevertheless, results highlight the potential of causal discovery algorithms for further analysis of interacting tipping elements. As a promising application for continued work, more recent observational data or Earth system models constrained by paleoclimate proxies are identified.

---

### Code
The code directory contains all scripts and notebooks used in the project. It is structured into three parts: one taking a statistical physics perspective on interacting tipping elements, a systematic benchmark of the capabilities of PCMCI(+) at reconstructing interactions from synthetic data and an exemplary application to paleoclimate proxies.

1. Statistical Physics Perspective
    - `code/TippingFPE.py` and `code/run_binary_FPE_analysis.ipynb` include code to simulate the Fokker-Planck equation associated with a binary feedback setup.
   - `code/results_binary_FPE_analysis_noise0p2_uniform.ipynb` describes how the results where analysed and plotted.
   - `code/detection_power_noise_level.ipynb` and `code/stochastic_tipping.ipynb`include further code that fits into this statistical physics framework.
   

2. Systematic Benchmark
   - `code/pycascades_solver.py` and `code/earth_network_constants.py`contain my implementation of the dynamical model of interacting tipping elements (PyCascades) used here.
   - `code/detection_power_nonsteady.ipynb` includes an analysis how nonstationarity affects the conditional independence tests.
   - `code/detection_power_different_links.ipynb` finally includes the systematic benchmark for different coupling configurations in a binary network and one resembling a Earth network of interacting tipping elements.
   

3. Paleoclimate Application
   - `code/davtian_paleo.ipynb` contains the full analyis of the paleoclimate proxies taken from [Davtian _et.al._](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209558120) and the application of PCMCI+ to them.


### Data
The folder `data/` holds most cached data that was too exhaustive to compute on the fly. Simple simulations are directly done in the notebooks and are not cached. 

The numeric simulation of the FPE equation is quite large and not included here. Please contact me if you want to access it. 

### Final Thesis Document
The `thesis.pdf` file is the final document of my master's thesis. It includes detailed descriptions of the methodologies, analyses, results, and conclusions drawn from the research.

### Contact

If you have any questions or need further information, please feel free to contact me [david.strahl@uni-potsdam.de](mailto:david.strahl@uni-potsdam.de)

Thank you for your interest in my work!
